PEP: 9999
Title: Python Package Index (Warehouse) Legacy JSON API
Author: Cooper Lees <me@cooperlees.com>,
        Nikita Chepanov <nikita@chepanov.com>,
        Sumana Harihareswara <sh@changeset.nyc>
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Sponsor: Łukasz Langa <lukasz@python.org>
BDFL-Delegate: Donald Stufft <donald at stufft.io>
Created: 28-Jun-2020
Post-History: 10-Jun-2020


.. highlight:: rst

Abstract
========

The Python Package Index (Warehouse) provides a way of querying project
metadata known as the JSON API. This PEP formalizes the existing API as version 1.0.

Motivation
==========

The JSON API was never standardized, and 3rd-party index implementations had to
reverse engineer the format to implement it.

This PEP aims to lock in the existing format of the API returned data as a standard.
This is to create a guarantee for consumers (e.g., client applications like pip, pipenv and more).
It also aims to help other indexes (such as devpi, pypiserver or proprietary indexes) to
implement the standard and be assured of interoperability.

Definitions
===========

* **Legacy JSON API**: Canonical / historical name given to this API described in this PEP
* **Release file**: Downloadable and installable distribution with Python source or binaries
* **Project**: A PyPI Project is a pip-installable Python package typically containing multiple versions with
  potentially multiple installable artifacts
* **Project release**: In the context of the JSON API, a Project Release is a set of Release Files associated
  with a specific version

Goal
=====

Formalize the structure of the legacy JSON API without changing the output format.
This pep also aims to document all properties in the API specifying whether they are required, optional,
deprecated while detailing their intended meaning and type. A lot of the fields/keys expose
data from the `Packaging Core Metadata <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata>`_
specification.

Non-goals
=========

The following are not part of this proposal, but is likely to warrant subsequent
PEPs:

* Adding properties that aren't already returned by the legacy JSON API endpoints
* Removing properties that are already returned by the legacy JSON API endpoints
* Adding discovery endpoints
* Adding pagination capabilities
* Adding authentication
* Adding writeable endpoints
* Deprecating the legacy JSON API endpoints
* Supporting TUF (PEP 458): This version of the JSON API is not protected by TUF,
  and so should not be used for dependency resolution.
* Deprecating XML-RPC API: The PEP lays out the foundation for the future deprecation of the XML-RPC API.


Specification
=============

The JSON API is a HTTP GET based API.


Response Headers
----------------

HTTP responses must be sent with the following content type:

.. code-block::

   content-type: application/json


API URLs
--------

All URLs are described relative to a ``$root``.
In case of PyPI the ``$root`` is https://pypi.org.

* ``$root/pypi/$project_name/json``
* ``$root/pypi/$project_name/$version/json``

The two URLs have identical structure, however the version-less URL will always
return the latest installable version.

For example if the latest installable version of ``urllib3`` is 1.26.6, then:
``$root/pypi/urllib3/json`` is equivalent to ``$root/pypi/urllib3/1.26.6/json``.

Canonical project names
------------------------

The ``$project_name`` parameter is always normalized as described in PEP 503 [2]_.
This can be done using ``packaging.utils.canonicalize_name``.

If the requested project name can be normalized to match an existing project.
The API then must reply with "301 Moved Permanently" and provide
a "Location" header with a normalized project name.

For example if ``importlib-metadata`` is the canonical name of the project,
then when ``$root/pypi/Importlib.-_-.Metadata/json`` is requested the API must reply with:

.. code-block::

   HTTP/1.1 301 Moved Permanently

   content-type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
   location: $root/pypi/importlib-metadata/json 

Project version normalization
-----------------------------

The version is also normalized using ``packaging.utils.canonicalize_version``.

For example the following URLs would return  identical results:

* ``$root/pypi/urllib3/1.26.6/json``
* ``$root/pypi/urllib3/1.26.6.0.0.0/json``


Dealing with errors
-------------------

Client errors are all handled via HTTP response codes. The following is
returned:

* 301: When a JSON URL has a trailing "/" the server should redirect to
  a URL removing the tailing "/" removed
* 301: When the requested project name is not normalized, but matched a known
  project after normalization.
* 404: When a projects does not exist or requested version cannot be found.
* 500: When an internal code logic or database error occurs

Response Specification
-----------------------

A ``json_api.schema.json`` JSON Schema file can be found `here
<pep-9999/json_api.schema.json>`_.

Some of the properties are marked as "[DEPRECATED]" which means they should be
present, but the contents of the properties should not be populated or relied on
by the users.

There are four main top level keys:

.. code-block::

   {
      "info": {...},
      "last_serial": {...},
      "releases": {...},
      "urls": {...},
      "vulnerabilities": {...}
   }

**info**

This property contains a JSON object with generic information about the requested
version of the project. Many of the properties are generated from
https://packaging.python.org/specifications/core-metadata/.

A minimal response containing only the required properties may look like this:

.. code-block::

   {
      author: "A. Random Developer",
      author_email: "author@example.com",
      license: "MIT",
      name: "sampleproject",
      project_url: "https://pypi.org/project/sampleproject/",
      version: "2.0.0",
      yanked: false,
      yanked_reason: null
   }


**last_serial**

The serial is a monotonically increasing integer sequence available for each
project that changes every time the project is updated. PyPI calculates this number
for the main index and each index can implement their own algorithm there as long as
it's monotonically increasing integer returned.

**releases** and **urls**

The ``releases`` property contains all available Release files across all
released versions of the project including yanked releases and pre-releases.

The list of released files can be empty for some versions of the project.

The ``urls`` property only provides information about the requested version of the
project. Consequently the content of the ``urls`` property is always duplicated
as one of the versions in the ``releases`` property.

For example, if ``$root/pypi/urllib3/1.26.6/json`` was requested, the
content of ``urls`` property in the example below will be identical to the
contents of ``releases["1.26.6"]``.

Each ``{urllib3-1.26.6-...}`` block represents a Release file described in the
following section.

.. code-block::

  "releases: {
    ...
    "1.26.4": [...],
    "1.26.5": [...],
    "1.26.6": [{urllib3-1.26.6-py2.py3-none-any.whl}, {urllib3-1.26.6.tar.gz}],
    ...
  },
  "urls": [{urllib3-1.26.6-py2.py3-none-any.whl}, {urllib3-1.26.6.tar.gz}]

**Release file**

A downloadable and installable artifact, always associated with a particular
version of the project.

A minimal example containing only the required properties may look like this:

.. code-block::

   {
      filename: "sampleproject-2.0.0-py3-none-any.whl",
      url: "https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/b8/f7/dd9223b39f683690c30f759c876df0944815e47b588cb517e4b9e652bcf7/sampleproject-2.0.0-py3-none-any.whl",
      digests: {
         md5: "34b3750e8a39e7c2930cac64cd44ca0a",
         sha256: "2b0c55537193b792098977fdb62f0acbaeb2c3cfc56d0e24ccab775201462e04"
      },
      packagetype: "bdist_wheel",
      size: 4209,
      upload_time: "2020-06-25T19:09:43",
      upload_time_iso_8601: "2020-06-25T19:09:43.103653Z",
      yanked: false,
      yanked_reason: null
   },

References
==========

.. [1] JSON Schema https://json-schema.org/
.. [2] PEP 503 pep-0503
.. [3] Semantic Versioning https://semver.org/


Acknowledgments
===============

* GitHub issue requesting PEP - https://github.com/pypa/packaging-problems/issues/367
* Discussion 1 - https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-for-the-python-package-index-json-api/5717/14
* Discussion 2 - https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-rfc-python-package-index-warehouse-json-api-v1/9205/15
* devpi issue requesting JSON API Support - https://github.com/devpi/devpi/issues/801

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
